THE ASCENT OF MONEY
HAS NEVER BEEN SMOOTH.
SO LONG AS HUMAN
EXPECTATIONS OF THE FUTURE
"VEER FROM THE OVER-OPTIMISTIC
TO THE OVER-PESSIMISTIC,"
"FROM GREED TO FEAR,"
STOCK PRICES WILL
TEND TO TRACE A LINE
NOT UNLIKE THE JAGGED
AND IRREGULAR PEAKS
OF THE ANDES.
"AS AN INVESTOR, YOU
JUST HAVE TO HOPE"
"THAT WHEN YOU HAVE TO COME DOWN
FROM THE SUMMIT OF EUPHORIA,"
"ITLL BE ON A NICE,
SMOOTH SKI SLOPE."
"YET IN THE PAST YEAR,"
IT SEEMED AS IF PLANET FINANCE
HAS PLUNGED OVER A SHEER CLIFF.
SOME OF THE BIGGEST
NAMES ON WALL STREET
AND IN OTHER FINANCIAL
CENTERS AROUND THE WORLD
HAVE BEEN WIPED OUT.
I WANT TO EXPLAIN TO
YOU JUST HOW MONEY ROSE
TO PLAY SUCH A
TERRIFYINGLY DOMINANT ROLE
IN ALL OUR LIVES.
"WHATS MORE, I WANT TO
REVEAL FINANCIAL HISTORY"
AS THE ESSENTIAL BACKSTORY
BEHIND ALL HISTORY.
HOW THE BOND MARKET
DICTATED THE OUTCOME OF
THE BATTLE OF WATERLOO
AND CREATED THE WORLDS
GREATEST FINANCIAL DYNASTY.
HOW IT ENSURED THE
DEFEAT OF THE SOUTH
IN THE AMERICAN CIVIL WAR.
HOW IT WAS THAT MONETARY
MELTDOWNS MADE REVOLUTIONS.
WEVE JUST WITNESSED ONE OF
THE GREATEST FINANCIAL CRISES
OF ALL TIME.
2008 WAS ONE OF
THE 8 WORST YEARS
IN AMERICAN STOCK
MARKET HISTORY.
BUT EVEN LAST YEARS CARNAGE
PALES INTO INSIGNIFICANCE
ALONGSIDE WHAT
HAPPENED IN FRANCE
NEARLY 300 YEARS AGO.
CAPTIONING MADE POSSIBLE
BY FRIENDS OF NCI
[MEN YELLING]
FUNDING FOR THE ASCENT OF MONEY
WAS PROVIDED BY...
"MY IDEA CREATED JOBS
FOR 2,000 PEOPLE."
MY IDEA WILL BRING
RENEWABLE ENERGY
AN ENTREPRENEUR WITH AN
IDEA CAN CHANGE THE WORLD.
I HAVE AN IDEA.
THE MAN RESPONSIBLE
FOR THE FIRST STOCK
MARKET CRASH IN HISTORY
"WAS JOHN LAW,"
A RENEGADE SCOTS MURDERER
WHO HAD ESCAPED FROM
BRITAIN VIA HOLLAND
AND ARRIVED IN FRANCE
TO SEEK HIS FORTUNE.
"BY THE END OF 1719,
HE HAD FOUND IT."
ENSCONCED IN HIS PALATIAL SUITE
"HERE IN THE PLACE VENDOME,"
"THATS THE RITZ
HOTEL OVER THERE,"
LAW HAD ACHIEVED A
GREATER CONCENTRATION
OF FINANCIAL POWER IN HIS HANDS
THAN ANY INDIVIDUAL
IN ALL FRENCH HISTORY.
"AS CONTROLLER GENERAL
OF ALL FRENCH FINANCES,"
HE WAS LITERALLY IN
CHARGE OF THE COLLECTION
"OF ALL FRANCES INDIRECT TAXES,"
"THE ENTIRE FRENCH
NATIONAL DEBT,"
"THAT PRODUCED THE COUNTRYS
GOLD AND SILVER COINAGE,"
"THE COMPANY OF THE INDIES,"
"BETTER KNOWN AS THE
MISSISSIPPI COMPANY,"
"WHICH HAD A MONOPOLY ON
THE IMPORT OF TOBACCO,"
"ALL OF FRANCES TRADE
WITH AFRICA AND ASIA,"
"OH, AND THE LOUISIANA COLONY,"
WHICH COVERED AROUND
A QUARTER OF WHAT IS
TODAY THE UNITED STATES.
"IN HIS OWN RIGHT,"
"LAW ALSO OWNED THE
MASSERAN PALACE,"
"MORE THAN 1/3 OF THE BUILDINGS
AROUND THE PLACE VENDOME,"
"MORE THAN 12 COUNTRY ESTATES,"
"SEVERAL PLANTATIONS
IN LOUISIANA,"
"AND 100,000,000
LIVRE OF SHARES"
IN THE MISSISSIPPI COMPANY.
"NOT BAD GOING FOR A MAN
WHO, WHEN HED FIRST COME
HERE 12 YEARS BEFORE,"
"HAD BEEN IDENTIFIED AS A
JOUEUR, A PROFESSIONAL GAMBLER,"
AND A POSSIBLE SPY.
"BY JANUARY 1720, LAWS
TRIUMPH SEEMED COMPLETE."
A SCOTS MURDERER WAS IN EFFECT
PRIME MINISTER OF FRANCE.
LAWS PROBLEM WAS THAT
HE HAD NO CLEAR IDEA
"ON THE CONTRARY, HE HAD A
STRONG PERSONAL INTEREST"
"IN PRINTING MORE MONEY,"
"WHICH HIS OWN BANK CONTROLLED,"
TO DRIVE UP THE PRICE OF
HIS OWN COMPANYS SHARES.
"FORTUNATELY FOR LAW, BOTH
HIS BANK AND HIS COMPANY"
WERE NOW OPERATING OUT OF
THE VERY SAME BUILDING--
"THE MASSERAN PALACE, WHICH
HE HIMSELF HAPPENED TO OWN."
SO ALL HE HAD TO DO IN
ORDER TO DRIVE UP THE
COMPANYS SHARE PRICE
WAS TO TAKE A WALK
DOWN THE CORRIDOR
FROM THE OFFICE WHERE
THE SHARES WERE ISSUED
TO THE OFFICE WHERE
THE MONEY WAS PRINTED.
YOU COULD SAY THAT
LAW HAD BECOME
THE ULTIMATE INSIDER TRADER.
"AT ROOT, LAWS
SYSTEM WAS A SCAM."
A PONZI SCHEME LIKE THE ONE
OPERATED BY BERNIE MADOFF.
IT TAKES ITS NAME FROM
THE LEGENDARY ITALIAN-AMERICAN
CON MAN CHARLES PONZI.
TO PAY OUT THE GENEROUS
RETURNS ITS PROMISED
"TO THE FIRST LOT OF SUCKERS,"
A PONZI SCHEME NEEDS
TO TAKE IN MORE MONEY
FROM THE NEXT LOT OF SUCKERS.
"IN JOHN LAWS SCHEME,"
THE ACQUISITIONS
OF OTHER COMPANIES
AND THE GENEROUS
DIVIDENDS LAW PAID
"WERE FINANCED, NOT
FROM COMPANY PROFITS,"
BUT SIMPLY BY
SELLING NEW SHARES.
"LIKE ALL PONZI
SCHEMES, HOWEVER,"
THE EFFECTS OF LAWS
SYSTEM WAS TO GENERATE
AN UNSUSTAINABLE BUBBLE.
LAW HAD REINFLATED
THE FRENCH ECONOMY
WITH A COMBINATION OF PAPER
MONEY AND PUBLIC CONFIDENCE.
"NOW, UNFORTUNATELY,"
HIS BUBBLE WAS ABOUT TO GO POP.
"BY THE BEGINNING OF 1720,"
FRANCE WAS IN THE
GRIP OF A MANIA--
THE MISSISSIPPI BUBBLE.
"BUT THE MAN RESPONSIBLE,"
"THE RENEGADE SCOTS MURDERER
AND GAMBLER, JOHN LAW,"
"WHOD RISEN TO BECOME MASTER
OF THE ENTIRE FRENCH ECONOMY,"
WAS ABOUT TO DISCOVER AN
INVIOLABLE LAW OF FINANCE--
TREES DONT GROW TO THE SKY.
"ACCORDING TO LAWS
P.R. CAMPAIGN,"
THE HUGE PROFITS
HE WAS PROJECTING
"WOULD COME FROM THE FRENCH
COLONY OF LOUISIANA,"
"WHICH HE PAINTED AS A
VERITABLE GARDEN OF EDEN,"
INHABITED BY FRIENDLY
NOBLE SAVAGES
WILLING TO EXCHANGE A
CORNUCOPIA OF EXOTIC GOODS.
THESE WOULD FLOW TO
FRANCE THROUGH A NEW CITY
AT THE MOUTH OF
THE MISSISSIPPI--
NAMED TO FLATTER THE
ALWAYS-SUSCEPTIBLE
FRENCH REGENT--
THE DUKE OF ORLEANS.
ALL THE COLONY
LACKED WAS SETTLERS.
GRASPING THAT FRENCHMEN
WERE MORE INTERESTED
IN STOCK MARKET SPECULATION
"THAN THE HARD GRAFT
OF COLONIZATION,"
LAW LAUNCHED A RECRUITMENT DRIVE
IN THE FRANCO-GERMAN
BORDERLANDS.
SEVERAL THOUSAND BOLD
GERMANS SIGNED UP
AND SET SAIL TO
THE PROMISED LAND.
THEY ENDED UP HERE.
"THIS WAS THE UNFORTUNATE
IMMIGRANTS FIRST
GLIMPSE OF LOUISIANA,"
AN INSECT-INFESTED SWAMP.
"WITHIN A YEAR, 80% OF THEM
HAD DIED OF STARVATION"
OR TROPICAL DISEASES
LIKE YELLOW FEVER.
"SADLY FOR LAW, THE MISSISSIPPI
COMPANYS PRINCIPLE ASSET,"
"ITS MONOPOLY ON
TRADE WITH LOUISIANA,"
"LOOKED LIKE BEING, MORE
OR LESS, WORTHLESS."
"AS THE INSCRIPTION ON THIS
DUTCH CARTOON PUT IT,"
THIS IS THE WONDROUS
MISSISSIPPI LAND
"MADE FAMOUS BY HER
SHARE DEALINGS,"
"WHICH THROUGH DECEIT
AND DEVIOUS CONDUCT,"
HAS SQUANDERED
COUNTLESS TREASURES.
"HOWEVER MEN REGARD THE SHARES,"
IT IS WIND AND SMOKE
AND NOTHING MORE.
"TO LAW, ECONOMIC SUCCESS
WAS ALL ABOUT CONFIDENCE."
BUT THIS WAS A CONFIDENCE TRICK.
"IN PARIS, THE FIRST
RUMORS BEGAN TO CIRCULATE"
THAT ALL WAS NOT WELL
WITH LAWS SYSTEM.
THE SHARE PRICE OF THE
MISSISSIPPI COMPANY
BEGAN TO SLIDE.
[MEN YELLING]
"IN A DESPERATE BID
TO AVERT MELTDOWN,"
LAW CALLED ON THE
DUKE OF ORLEANS
TO CUT THE OFFICIAL SHARE PRICE
"FROM 9,000 LIVRE TO 5,000."
"THIS WAS WHEN THE LIMITS
OF ROYAL ABSOLUTISM,"
"THE FOUNDATION OF LAWS SYSTEM,
SUDDENLY BECAME APPARENT."
"WITHIN WEEKS, THE SHARE
PRICE WAS IN FREEFALL."
ANGRY CROWDS GATHERED
OUTSIDE LAWS BANK.
STONES WERE THROWN.
WINDOWS BROKEN.
"BY DECEMBER, THE SHARES
HAD LOST MORE THAN
90% OF THEIR VALUE."
THIS FRENCH MAP FROM 1730
GIVES AN ABSOLUTELY WONDERFUL
VISUAL REPRESENTATION
OF THE WORLDS FIRST
STOCK MARKET BUBBLE.
HERE AT THE TOP IS
THE GODDESS FORTUNA
POURING DOWN GOODIES
FROM HER HORN OF PLENTY.
HERE ARE THE HAPPY INVESTORS
RECEIVING THEIR SHARES
"IN THE MISSISSIPPI COMPANY
FROM FLYING CHERUBS,"
"BUT DOWN BELOW, THERE
ARE SOME OTHER CHERUBS"
"CHOPPING UP THE SHARES BESIDE
A SHATTERED PRINTING PRESS,"
AND THERE ARE 2 MORE
CHERUBS BLOWING BUBBLES.
"TO THE RIGHT, THERE ARE 4
VERY UNHAPPY-LOOKING MEN,"
ONE OF WHOM IS PREPARING
TO COMMIT SUICIDE
BY FALLING ON HIS SWORD.
"AS IF PRICKED BY A SWORD,"
THE MISSISSIPPI
BUBBLE HAD NOW BURST.
"IT WAS AT THIS
MOMENT THAT LAW,"
"VILIFIED BY THE FRENCH PEOPLE,"
FLED THE COUNTRY.
HE NEVER SAW HIS WIFE
AND DAUGHTER AGAIN.
"HE SPENT THE REST OF
HIS LIFE IN VENICE,"
DIVIDING HIS TIME BETWEEN
WRITING LONG
SELF-JUSTIFYING LETTERS
AND GAMBLING.
HE DIED IN 1729.
"IN FRANCE, HOWEVER,"
HIS DEVASTATING LEGACY LIVED ON.
LAWS BUBBLE AND BUST
"FATALLY SET BACK FRANCES
FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENT,"
PUTTING FRENCHMEN
OFF PAPER MONEY
AND STOCK MARKETS FOR
MORE THAN A GENERATION.
"THE FRENCH MONARCHYS FISCAL
CRISIS WENT UNRESOLVED,"
"AND FOR THE REST OF THE REIGN
OF LOUIS XV AND LOUIS XVI,"
THE CROWN LIVED
FROM HAND TO MOUTH.
"EVENTUALLY, FRANCE WAS
DRIVEN BY ROYAL BANKRUPTCY"
TO REVOLUTION.
THE REVOLUTION OF 1789
"NOT ONLY TOPPLED
THE FRENCH MONARCHY,"
IT ALSO PLUNGED EUROPE
INTO A SUCCESSION
OF BLOODY WARS THAT LASTED
FROM 1792 UNTIL 1815.
THE MAN WHO EMERGED AS THE
GREATEST WARLORD OF THE AGE
WAS A DIMINUTIVE CORSICAN
NAMED NAPOLEON BONAPARTE.
LESS WELL KNOWN IS THE
MAN WHO HELPED FINANCE
BONAPARTES ULTIMATE DOWNFALL.
THIS HOUSE WAS BUILT BY
THE FINANCIAL DYNASTY
THAT HELPED DECIDE THE
BATTLE OF WATERLOO.
THE DYNASTY THAT PRODUCED
THE MAN THEY CALLED THE
BONAPARTE OF FINANCE--
THE EMPEROR OF THE
19TH-CENTURY BOND MARKET.
"HE IS MASTER OF
UNBOUNDED WEALTH,"
HE BOASTS THAT HE IS THE
ARBITER OF PEACE AND WAR
AND THAT THE CREDIT OF
NATIONS DEPENDS UPON HIS NOD.
MINISTERS OF STATE
ARE IN HIS PAY.
"THOSE WORDS, SPOKEN IN 1828"
"BY THE RADICAL MEMBER OF
PARLIAMENT, THOMAS DUNSCOMBE,"
"WERE DESCRIBING
NATHAN ROTHSCHILD,"
BOND TRADER EXTRAORDINAIRE
AND FOUNDER OF THE LONDON
BRANCH OF WHAT BECAME
THE BIGGEST BANK IN THE WORLD.
THE BOND MARKET
MADE THE ROTHSCHILDS
STUPENDOUSLY RICH.
SO RICH THAT THEY
COULD AFFORD TO BUILD
41 STATELY HOMES
ALL OVER EUROPE.
"THIS IS NUMBER 29,"
"WADDESDON MANNER IN
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE,"
WHICH HAS BEEN RESTORED
IN ALL ITS GILDED GLORY
"BY JACOB ROTHSCHILD,"
NATHANS GREAT-GREAT-GREAT
GRANDSON.
"WELL, HE WAS SHORT, FAT,"
"OBSESSIVE, EXTREMELY CLEVER,"
"WHOLLY FOCUSED,"
AND I CANT IMAGINE
HE WOULDVE BEEN
A VERY PLEASANT PERSON TO
HAVE HAD DEALINGS WITH.
"BETWEEN AROUND 1810 AND 1836,"
THE 5 SONS OF MAYER
AMSCHEL ROTHSCHILD
ROSE FROM THE OBSCURITY
OF THE FRANKFURT GHETTO
TO OBTAIN A POSITION
OF UNEQUALED POWER
IN INTERNATIONAL FINANCE.
"IT WAS THE THIRD SON, NATHAN,"
WHO ORCHESTRATED THIS
FAMILY TRIUMPH FROM LONDON.
EVELYN ROTHSCHILD IS NATHANS
GREAT-GREAT GRANDSON.
"HE RECENTLY RETIRED AS
CHAIRMAN OF ROTHSCHILDS,"
THE BANK THAT NATHAN BUILT.
"HE WAS VERY AMBITIOUS,
AND HE MOVED TO LONDON"
AND I THINK HE WAS DETERMINED.
I DONT THINK HE
SUFFERED FOOLS LIGHTLY.
MAYBE THATS A FAMILY TRAIT.
THIS IS ONE OF THE FEW SURVIVING
LETTERS FROM NATHAN ROTHSCHILD
"TO HIS BROTHERS, WRITTEN, AS
ALWAYS, IN JUDEN-DEUTSCH,"
"THAT WAS GERMAN TRANSLITERATED
INTO HEBREW CHARACTERS,"
AND IT GIVES YOU AN IDEA
WHAT AN EXTRAORDINARY
WORK ETHIC THE MAN HAD
AND HOW HE TRIED
TO IMPOSE IT ON HIS POOR
LONG-SUFFERING BROTHERS.
JUST LISTEN TO THIS--
"DEAR AMSCHEL, IM
WRITING YOU MY OPINION"
BECAUSE ITS MY
DAMN DUTY TO DO SO.
"I READ YOUR LETTERS, NOT ONCE,
BUT OFTEN A HUNDRED TIMES"
"BECAUSE YOU CAN WELL
IMAGINE THAT AFTER DINNER,"
"I DONT READ BOOKS,
I DONT PLAY CARDS,"
I DONT GO TO THE THEATER.
MY ONLY PLEASURE IS MY BUSINESS.
[OVERLAPPING CHATTER]
"IT WAS THIS PHENOMENAL DRIVE,"
"ALLIED WITH INNATE
FINANCIAL GENIUS,"
THAT PROPELLED
NATHAN FROM OBSCURITY
TO MASTERY OF THE
LONDON BOND MARKET.
BUT THE OPPORTUNITY FOR
A FINANCIAL BREAKTHROUGH
CAME FROM WAR.
[DRUMS BEATING]
"[MAN, INDISTINCT]"
"ON THE MORNING OF
JUNE THE 18TH, 1815,"
"67,000 BRITISH, DUTCH,
AND GERMAN TROOPS"
UNDER THE DUKE OF
WELLINGTONS COMMAND
"LOOKED OUT ACROSS THE
FIELDS OF WATERLOO,"
TOWARDS AN ALMOST-EQUAL
NUMBER OF FRENCH TROOPS
"COMMANDED BY THE FRENCH
EMPEROR, NAPOLEON BONAPARTE."
THE BATTLE OF WATERLOO
WAS THE CULMINATION
OF MORE THAN 2 DECADES
OF INTERMITTENT CONFLICT
BETWEEN BRITAIN AND FRANCE.
BUT IT WAS MORE THAN JUST
A BATTLE BETWEEN 2 ARMIES.
IT WAS ALSO A CONTEST BETWEEN
RIVAL FINANCIAL SYSTEMS.
"ONE THE FRENCH
BASED ON PLUNDER,"
THE OTHER THE BRITISH
BASED ON DEBT.
"TO PAY FOR THE WAR,"
THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT HAD SOLD
AN UNPRECEDENTED
AMOUNT OF BONDS.
"ACCORDING TO A
LONGSTANDING LEGEND,"
THE ROTHSCHILD FAMILY
MADE THEIR FIRST MILLIONS
BY SPECULATING ON HOW THE
OUTCOME THE BATTLE OF WATERLOO
WOULD AFFECT THE
PRICE OF THESE BONDS.
FIRE!
IT WAS THIS LEGEND OF
JEWISH PROFITEERING
THAT A CENTURY LATER
THE NAZIS DID THEIR BEST
TO EMBROIDER.
"IN 1940, JOSEPH
GOEBBELS APPROVED THE
RELEASE OF THIS FILM,"
DIE ROTHSCHILDS.
[SPEAKING GERMAN]
NATHAN IS SEEN BRIBING
A FRENCH GENERAL
TO ENSURE THE DUKE OF
WELLINGTONS VICTORY
AND THEN DELIBERATELY
MISREPORTING
THE OUTCOME OF THE
BATTLE IN LONDON.
THIS TRIGGERS PANIC
SELLING OF BRITISH BONDS
WHICH NATHAN THEN SNAPS UP
AT BARGAIN-BASEMENT PRICES.
WHAT HAPPENED HERE IN 1815
WAS ALTOGETHER DIFFERENT.
"FAR FROM MAKING MONEY FROM
WELLINGTONS DEFEAT OF NAPOLEON,"
THE ROTHSCHILDS WERE
VERY NEARLY RUINED BY IT.
"THERE FORTUNE WAS
MADE, NOT BY WATERLOO,"
BUT DESPITE IT.
THIS IS HOW IT REALLY HAPPENED.
SELLING BONDS TO THE PUBLIC
"HAD RAISED PLENTY OF CASH
FOR THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT,"
BUT NEITHER BONDS NOR BANK NOTES
WERE ANY USE TO WELLINGTON.
TO PROVISION HIS TROOPS
AND PAY BRITAINS ALLIES
HE NEEDED A CURRENCY THAT
WAS UNIVERSALLY ACCEPTABLE.
NATHAN ROTHSCHILD
WAS GIVEN THE JOB
OF TAKING THE MONEY
RAISED IN THE BOND MARKET
AND DELIVERING IT TO
WELLINGTON AS GOLD.
THE SUCCESS OF THIS OPERATION
WOULD DETERMINE THE FATE
OF THE WARRING EMPIRES
AND OF ALL EUROPE.
THIS LETTER MARKS A TURNING
POINT IN THE HISTORY
OF BOTH THE ROTHSCHILD FAMILY
AND THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT.
"ITS DATED THE 11TH
OF JANUARY 1814,"
AND ITS AN ORDER FROM THE
CHANCELLOR OF THE EXCHEQUER
TO THE COMMISSARY-IN-CHIEF
"TELLING HIM TO APPOINT NATHAN
ROTHSCHILD, MR. ROTHSCHILD,"
AS A BRITISH GOVERNMENT AGENT.
NATHANS JOB WAS
TO GATHER TOGETHER
AS MUCH GOLD AND
SILVER AS HE COULD FIND
"AND MAKE SURE IT GOT TO
THE DUKE OF WELLINGTON
AND HIS ARMY,"
WHO HAD JUST FOUGHT
THEIR WAY OUT OF SPAIN
INTO THE SOUTH OF FRANCE.
IT WAS AN OPERATION
THAT RELIED HEAVILY
ON THE ROTHSCHILDS UNIQUE
PAN-EUROPEAN CREDIT NETWORK
AND ALSO NATHANS
ABILITY TO MOBILIZE GOLD
THE WAY WELLINGTON
COULD MOBILIZE TROOPS.
SHIFTING SUCH VAST AMOUNTS OF
GOLD IN THE MIDDLE OF A WAR
"WAS HUGELY RISKY, OF COURSE,"
"YET FROM THE ROTHSCHILDS
POINT OF VIEW,"
THE HEFTY COMMISSIONS
THEY WERE ABLE TO CHARGE
MORE THAN JUSTIFIED THE RISKS.
THE ROTHSCHILDS SOON
BECAME INDISPENSABLE
TO THE BRITISH WAR EFFORT.
"IN THE WORDS OF THE BRITISH
COMMISSARY-IN-CHIEF,"
HAS EXECUTED THE VARIOUS
SERVICES ENTRUSTED
TO HIM IN THIS LINE
ADMIRABLY WELL.
"AND THOUGH A JEW,"
WE PLACE A GOOD DEAL
OF CONFIDENCE IN HIM.
THE ROTHSCHILDS WERE SO
EFFECTIVE AS WAR FINANCIERS
BECAUSE THEY HAD A
READY-MADE BANKING NETWORK
WITHIN THE FAMILY.
"NATHAN IN LONDON,
AMSCHEL IN FRANKFURT,"
"JAMES IN PARIS,
CARL IN AMSTERDAM,"
AND SALOMON ROVING
WHEREVER NATHAN SAW FIT.
[SPEAKING FRENCH]
"IF THE PRICE OF GOLD WAS HIGHER
IN, SAY, PARIS THAN IN LONDON,"
JAMES IN PARIS WOULD SELL...
AND NATHAN IN LONDON WOULD BUY.
"I THINK THEIR EDGE OVER
FAMILIES LIKE THE BARINGS,"
"WITH WHOM THEY WERE COMPETING,"
WAS THAT THEY HAD THEIR BROTHERS
IN VERY IMPORTANT FINANCIAL
CENTERS AND COUNTRIES.
"NOW, WHETHER THAT
WAS PREMEDITATED,"
"WHETHER THEY THOUGHT
THAT THROUGH AS THEY
GOT OUT OF THE GHETTOS,"
"HARD TO BELIEVE THEY
WENT AS FAR AS THAT,"
"BUT THATS WHAT HAPPENED,
AND ONCE THEY SAW THAT
IT WAS AN ADVANTAGE,"
I THINK THEY WORKED
ON THAT ADVANTAGE.
"IN MARCH 1815, NAPOLEON
RETURNED TO PARIS"
FROM EXILE IN ELBA
DETERMINED TO REVIVE
HIS IMPERIAL AMBITIONS.
"THE ROTHSCHILDS IMMEDIATELY
RAMPED UP THEIR GOLD OPERATION,"
BUYING UP ALL THE
BULLION AND COINS
THEY COULD LAY THEIR HANDS ON.
NATHANS REASON FOR BUYING THIS
HUGE STOCK OF GOLD WAS SIMPLE--
"HE ASSUMED THAT, AS
WITH ALL NAPOLEONS WARS,"
THIS WOULD BE A LONG ONE.
"HIS GOLD WOULD BE MORE
AND MORE SOUGHT AFTER,"
AND IT WOULD RISE IN VALUE.
IT PROVED TO BE A
NEAR-FATAL MISCALCULATION.
"WELLINGTON FAMOUSLY CALLED
THE BATTLE OF WATERLOO,"
THE NEAREST RUN THING YOU
EVER SAW IN YOUR LIFE.
"AFTER A DAY OF BRUTAL
CHARGES, COUNTER-CHARGES,"
"AND HEROIC DEFENSE, THE LATE
ARRIVAL OF THE PRUSSIAN ARMY"
FINALLY PROVED DECISIVE.
"FOR WELLINGTON, IT WAS
A GLORIOUS VICTORY."
BUT NOT FOR THE ROTHSCHILDS.
NO DOUBT IT WAS GRATIFYING
TO NATHAN ROTHSCHILD
TO BE THE FIRST TO HEAR THE
NEWS OF NAPOLEONS DEFEAT.
"THANKS TO THE SWIFTNESS OF
THE ROTHSCHILD COURIERS,"
HE HEARD IT FULLY 48 HOURS
BEFORE MAJOR HENRY PERCY
DELIVERED WELLINGTONS
OFFICIAL DISPATCH
"BUT NO MATTER HOW
EARLY HE HEARD IT,"
THE NEWS FROM WATERLOO
WAS ANYTHING BUT GOOD
FROM NATHANS POINT OF VIEW.
HE HAD BARGAINED FOR SOMETHING
MUCH MORE PROTRACTED.
NOW HE AND HIS BROTHERS WERE
SITTING ON TOP OF A PILE OF CASH
THAT NOBODY WANTED TO PAY
FOR A WAR THAT WAS OVER.
"WITH THE COMING OF
PEACE, THE GREAT ARMIES
THAT HAD FOUGHT NAPOLEON"
COULD BE DISBANDED.
THAT MEANT NO MORE
GOLD FOR SOLDIERS WAGES
"AND IT MEANT THE PRICE
OF GOLD, WHICH HAD
SOARED DURING THE WAR,"
WOULD FALL.
NATHAN WAS FACED WITH
HEAVY AND GROWING LOSSES.
[HORNS HONK]
THERE WAS ONLY ONE
POSSIBLE WAY OUT--
NATHAN COULD USE
THE ROTHSCHILD GOLD
TO MAKE A MASSIVE
AND HUGELY RISKY BET
ON THE BOND MARKET.
"ON JULY THE 20TH, 1815,"
THE EVENING ADDITION
OF THE LONDON COURIER
"REPORTED THAT NATHAN HAD MADE
GREAT PURCHASES OF STOCK,"
MEANING BRITISH
GOVERNMENT BONDS.
NATHANS GAMBLE WAS THAT THE
BRITISH VICTORY AT WATERLOO
WOULD SEND THE PRICE OF
BRITISH BONDS SOARING UPWARDS.
"NATHAN BOUGHT, AND AS THE
PRICE OF BONDS BEGAN TO RISE,"
HE KEPT ON BUYING.
"DESPITE HIS BROTHERS
DESPERATE ENTREATIES TO SELL,"
NATHAN HELD HIS NERVE...
FOR ANOTHER YEAR.
"EVENTUALLY, IN JULY 1817,"
"WITH BOND PRICES UP BY
40%, HE SOLD HIS HOLDING."
HIS PROFITS WERE WORTH
APPROXIMATELY 600
MILLION POUNDS TODAY.
THE ROTHSCHILDS HAD SHOWN THAT
BONDS WERE MORE THAN JUST A WAY
"FOR GOVERNMENTS TO
FUND THEIR WARS,"
THEY COULD ALSO BE
BOUGHT AND SOLD IN A WAY
THAT GENERATED SERIOUS MONEY.
AND WITH MONEY CAME POWER.
MAYER AMSCHEL ROTHSCHILD
"HAD REPEATEDLY
ADMONISHED HIS 5 SONS,"
"IF YOU CANT MAKE
YOURSELF LOVED,"
AS THEY BESTRODE THE MID-19TH
CENTURY FINANCIAL WORLD
"AS MASTERS OF THE BOND MARKET,"
THE ROTHSCHILDS WERE ALREADY
MORE FEARED THAN LOVED.
"BUT NOW THEY HAD
BECOME HATED, TOO."
THE FACT THAT THE
ROTHSCHILDS WERE JEWISH
GAVE A NEW IMPETUS
TO DEEP-ROOTED
ANTI-SEMITIC PREJUDICE.
"JUST A FEW MONTHS AGO, A
COLLEAGUE OF MINE IN MY OFFICE"
WHO COLLECTS POSTERS
FOUND THESE--
"WELL, THIS PARTICULAR,
RATHER EXTRAORDINARY"
EXAMPLE OF ANTI-SEMITISM
IN A STARK FORM
WHO WERE SORT OF EPITOMIZED
TO THEM AND OTHERS AT TIMES
THE MOST EXTREME FORMS OF
UNDESIRABLE CAPITALISM
AS PRACTICED BY JEWS.
IT WAS ABOVE ALL THE
ROTHSCHILDS SEEMING ABILITY
TO PERMIT OR PROHIBIT WARS
THAT AROUSED THE
MOST INDIGNATION.
YOU MIGHT HAVE THOUGHT
THAT THE ROTHSCHILDS
ACTUALLY NEEDED WAR.
"AFTER ALL, SOME OF
NATHANS BIGGEST DEALS"
"HAD BEEN PRODUCED BY WAR,"
"AND IF IT HADNT BEEN FOR
WAR, 19TH-CENTURY STATES"
WOULDNT HAVE NEEDED
TO ISSUE ANY BONDS
FOR THE ROTHSCHILDS
TO BUY AND SELL.
"BUT THE TROUBLE WITH WAR,"
"AND EVEN MORE SO
WITH REVOLUTION,"
WAS THAT IT INCREASED THE
RISK THAT A DEBTOR STATE
"MIGHT FAIL TO MEET
ITS COMMITMENTS,"
AND THAT HIT THE PRICE
OF EXISTING BONDS.
"BY THE MID-19TH
CENTURY, THE ROTHSCHILDS"
"WERE NO LONGER MERE TRADERS,
THEY WERE FUND MANAGERS,"
CAREFULLY TENDING
TO A VAST PORTFOLIO
OF THEIR OWN GOVERNMENT BONDS.
NOW THEY STOOD TO LOSE MUCH MORE
THAN TO GAIN FROM CONFLICT.
THE ROTHSCHILDS HAD
HELPED DECIDE THE OUTCOME
OF THE NAPOLEONIC WARS
BY PUTTING THEIR FINANCIAL
WEIGHT BEHIND BRITAIN.
NOW THEY WOULD HELP
DECIDE THE OUTCOME
OF THE AMERICAN CIVIL WAR...
...BY CHOOSING TO
SIT ON THE SIDELINES.
FIFTY YEARS AFTER THE
BATTLE AT WATERLOO
"AND ON THE OTHER
SIDE OF THE WORLD,"
ANOTHER GREAT WAR
WOULD BE DECIDED
"BY THE POWER OF
THE BOND MARKET,"
BUT THIS TIME IT WOULD
BE THE VANQUISHED
WHO MADE THE BIG BET AND LOST.
Man: FIRE!
THERE IS A VIEW THAT
THE KEY TURNING POINT
"IN THE AMERICAN CIVIL
WAR CAME IN MID-1863,"
"WHEN UNION FORCES
CAPTURED JACKSON,"
"THE MISSISSIPPI STATE CAPITAL,"
AND FORCED A CONFEDERATE ARMY
"TO RETREAT WESTWARD
TO VICKSBURG,"
THEIR BACKS TO THE
MISSISSIPPI RIVER.
"THERE, SURROUNDED
BY A UNION ARMY"
AND WITH UNION GUNBOATS
BOMBARDING THEIR POSITIONS
"FROM THE RIVER,"
THE SOUTHERNERS
HELD OUT FOR A MONTH
BEFORE FINALLY LAYING DOWN
THEIR ARMS ON JULY THE 4th.
THE MISSISSIPPI WAS FIRMLY
IN THE HANDS OF THE NORTH.
THE SOUTH WAS
LITERALLY SPLIT IN TWO.
"YET, THIS MILITARY SETBACK
WASNT THE DECISIVE FACTOR"
IN THE SOUTHS ULTIMATE DEFEAT.
"THE REAL TURNING
POINT CAME EARLIER,"
AND IT WAS FINANCIAL.
"200 MILES DOWNSTREAM
FROM VICKSBURG,"
"WHERE THE MISSISSIPPI
JOINS THE GULF OF MEXICO,"
LIES THE PORT OF NEW ORLEANS.
"THIS IS FORT PIKE,"
BUILT AFTER 1812 TO
PROTECT NEW ORLEANS
FROM A FUTURE BRITISH ATTACK.
"BUT 50 YEARS LATER, IT WASNT
ABLE TO PROTECT THE SOUTH"
FROM A NORTHERN ATTACK
WHEN CAPTAIN DAVID FARRAGUT
SEIZED NEW ORLEANS
"ON APRIL THE 28th, 1862."
"IT WAS A CRUCIAL MOMENT
IN THE CIVIL WAR,"
BECAUSE NEW ORLEANS WAS
THE PRINCIPAL OUTLET
FOR THE SOUTHS MOST
IMPORTANT EXPORT...
...COTTON.
"WITHOUT CONTROL OVER
THE COTTON TRADE,"
"THE SOUTHS CAUSE WAS DOOMED,"
BECAUSE COTTON HAD BECOME
THE ESSENTIAL INGREDIENT
IN AN AMBITIOUS SCHEME
TO BRING THE BOND
MARKET INTO THE WAR.
"LIKE THE ITALIAN CITY-STATES
500 YEARS BEFORE,"
THE CONFEDERATE TREASURY
HAD INITIALLY RAISED
MONEY FOR THE WAR
BY SELLING BONDS TO
ITS OWN CITIZENS.
BUT THERE WAS A FINITE AMOUNT OF
CAPITAL AVAILABLE IN THE SOUTH.
"TO SURVIVE, THE CONFEDERACY
LOOKED TO EUROPE"
IN THE HOPE THAT THE WORLDS
GREATEST FINANCIAL DYNASTY
"MIGHT HELP THEM
BEAT THE NORTH,"
AS THEY HAD HELPED
WELLINGTON BEAT NAPOLEON.
INITIALLY THE CONFEDERACY
HAD GROUNDS FOR OPTIMISM.
"IN NEW YORK, THE ROTHSCHILDS
AGENT WAS A NORTHERN DEMOCRAT,"
"AUGUST BELMONT, WHO OPPOSED
THE REPUBLICAN ABRAHAM LINCOLN"
IN THE PRESIDENTIAL
ELECTION OF 1860
AND WOULD DO SO
AGAIN 4 YEARS LATER.
BUT STILL THE
ROTHSCHILDS HESITATED.
LENDING TO THE
BRITISH GOVERNMENT
"TO HELP DEFEAT NAPOLEON
HAD BEEN ONE THING,"
BUT BUYING BONDS FROM A BUNCH
OF BREAKAWAY
SOUTHERN SLAVE STATES
SEEMED A RISK TOO FAR.
THE ROTHSCHILDS DECIDED
TO STAY OUT.
"YET, DESPITE THIS SETBACK,"
THE CONFEDERATE GOVERNMENT
HAD AN INGENIOUS TRICK
UP THEIR SLEEVES.
"THE TRICK, LIKE THE
SLEEVES THEMSELVES,"
WAS MADE OF COTTON.
THE SOUTHS IDEA WAS TO
USE COTTON AS COLLATERAL
TO BACK ITS BONDS.
INVESTORS WOULD BE COMFORTED
"TO KNOW THAT EVEN IF THE
INTEREST PAYMENTS DRIED UP,"
THEY COULD STILL DEMAND
THEIR COTTON INSTEAD.
THE SOUTHS AGENTS WENT
TO WORK SELLING THE BONDS
IN THE FINANCIAL
CENTERS OF EUROPE.
WHEN THE CONFEDERACY TRIED
TO MARKET CONVENTIONAL BONDS
"IN EUROPEAN FINANCIAL
CENTERS LIKE AMSTERDAMS,"
INVESTORS WOULDNT TOUCH
THEM WITH A BARGE POLE.
BUT WHEN AN OBSCURE FRENCH FIRM
NAMED EMILE ERLANGER AND COMPANY
"OFFERED COTTON-BACKED BONDS,"
IT WAS A COMPLETELY
DIFFERENT STORY.
THE KEY TO THE SUCCESS
OF THE ERLANGER BONDS
WAS THAT THEY COULD BE
CONVERTED INTO COTTON
AT THE PRE-WAR PRICE
OF 6 PENCE A POUND.
THESE COTTON BONDS
FORMED THE BASIS
OF THE SOUTHS NEW
FINANCIAL STRATEGY.
"IF THEY COULD RESTRICT
THE SUPPLY OF COTTON,"
ITS VALUE AND THE VALUE OF
THE BONDS WOULD INCREASE.
"AT THE SAME TIME, THE
CONFEDERATES SET OUT"
TO USE COTTON TO BLACKMAIL
THE MOST POWERFUL COUNTRY
IN THE WORLD--BRITAIN.
Woman: THE GROWTH OF THE
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
PROVIDED LIVERPOOL WITH
GROWING BONDS OF TRADE...
"[CONTINUES, INDISTINCT]"
...DURING THE 1800s.
"Ferguson: IN 1860,
THE PORT OF LIVERPOOL"
WAS THE PRINCIPAL GATEWAY
FOR IMPORTS OF COTTON
"TO THE BRITISH
TEXTILE INDUSTRY,"
THEN THE MAINSTAY OF THE
VICTORIAN INDUSTRIAL ECONOMY.
MORE THAN 80% OF THE COTTON CAME
FROM THE SOUTHERN UNITED STATES.
"NOW, THAT GAVE THE
CONFEDERATE LEADERSHIP HOPE"
THAT THEY HAD THE LEVERAGE
TO BRING IN BRITAIN
ON THEIR SIDE IN THE CIVIL WAR.
"TO RATCHET UP THE PRESSURE,"
THEY DECIDED TO
IMPOSE AN EMBARGO
ON ALL SHIPMENTS OF
COTTON TO LIVERPOOL.
"FOR A WHILE, THE SOUTHS
STRATEGY WORKED BRILLIANTLY."
COTTON PRICES SOARED.
SO DID THE VALUE
OF THE CONFEDERATES
COTTON-BACKED BONDS.
AND THE COTTON EMBARGO
DEVASTATED THE BRITISH ECONOMY.
MILLS WERE FORCED
TO LAY OFF WORKERS.
"EVENTUALLY, IN LATE 1862,"
PRODUCTION ALL BUT CEASED.
"THIS COTTON MILL IN STYAL,
SOUTH OF MANCHESTER,"
"EMPLOYED AROUND 400 WORKERS,"
"BUT THAT WAS JUST A FRACTION
OF THE 500,000 PEOPLE EMPLOYED"
BY KING COTTON
ACROSS LANCASHIRE.
"OBVIOUSLY, WITH NO COTTON,"
THERE WAS NOTHING
FOR PEOPLE TO DO.
HALF THE ENTIRE WORKFORCE OF
LANCASHIRE HAD BEEN LAID OFF.
A QUARTER OF THE POPULATION
WAS ON POOR RELIEF.
"THEY CALLED IT
THE COTTON FAMINE,"
BUT THIS REALLY WAS
A MANMADE FAMINE.
"BRITAIN WAS IN THE DOLDRUMS,"
AND THE SOUTHS COTTON
BONDS WERE RIDING HIGH.
YET THE SOUTHS ABILITY TO
MANIPULATE THE BOND MARKET
DEPENDED ON ONE
OVERRIDING CONDITION--
THAT INVESTORS COULD BE SURE
OF TAKING PHYSICAL POSSESSION
OF THE COTTON WHICH
UNDERPINNED THE BONDS
IF THE SOUTH FAILED TO
MAKE ITS INTEREST PAYMENTS.
AND THATS WHY THE
FALL OF NEW ORLEANS
"ON APRIL THE 28th, 1862,"
WAS THE REAL TURNING POINT
IN THE AMERICAN CIVIL WAR.
"NOW THAT THE SOUTHS MAIN
PORT WAS IN UNION HANDS,"
ANY INVESTOR WHO WANTED TO LAY
HIS HANDS ON SOUTHERN COTTON
HAD TO RUN THE UNIONS
FORMIDABLE NAVAL BLOCKADE.
[EXPLOSIONS]
THE CONFEDERATES HAD
OVERPLAYED THEIR HAND.
THEY HAD TURNED
OFF THE COTTON TAP
BUT THEN LOST THE ABILITY
TO TURN IT BACK ON.
"BY 1863, THE MILLS
OF LANCASHIRE"
HAD FOUND NEW SOURCES OF COTTON
"IN CHINA, EGYPT AND INDIA,"
AND INVESTORS WERE
RAPIDLY LOSING FAITH
IN THE SOUTHS
COTTON-BACKED BONDS.
THE CONSEQUENCES FOR
THE CONFEDERATE ECONOMY
WERE DISASTROUS.
WITH ITS DOMESTIC
BOND MARKETS EXHAUSTED
"AND ONLY 2 PALTRY
FOREIGN LOANS,"
THE CONFEDERACY REALLY
HAD NO ALTERNATIVE
BUT TO PRINT PAPER DOLLARS
LIKE THESE ONES HERE
IN THE LOUISIANA STATE MUSEUM
"TO PAY FOR THE WAR,"
"IN ALL, $1.7 BILLION WORTH."
"NOW, ITS TRUE THAT THE NORTH
ALSO PRINTED PAPER MONEY,"
"BUT BY THE END OF THE WAR,"
"ITS GREENBACKS WERE STILL
WORTH AROUND 50 PRE-WAR CENTS,"
WHEREAS A SOUTHERN GRAYBACK
WAS DOWN TO JUST 1 CENT.
"WHATS MORE, WITH MORE
AND MORE OF THIS CASH"
"CHASING FEWER AND FEWER GOODS,"
INFLATION IN THE
SOUTH SIMPLY EXPLODED.
"BY JANUARY 1865, THE
PRICE OF SOME GOODS"
WAS UP BY A FACTOR OF 90.
"THE ROTHSCHILDS, MEANWHILE,"
WHO HAD REFUSED TO BACK
THE CONFEDERATE BONDS
"AND SO HASTENED
THE SOUTHS DEMISE,"
HAD AMASSED SO MUCH MONEY
THAT THEIR WEALTH HAD
BECOME PROVERBIAL.
"AS THE POET HEINRICH
HEINE OBSERVED,"
"MONEY IS THE GOD OF OUR TIME,"
AND ROTHSCHILD IS HIS PROPHET.
"HEINE WAS ALSO STRUCK BY THE
WAY THAT FINANCIAL WEALTH,"
"PERSONIFIED BY
THE ROTHSCHILDS,"
POSED A REVOLUTIONARY CHALLENGE
TO THE OLD WEALTH OF THE
EUROPEAN ARISTOCRACY.
PROPERTY OWNERSHIP
WAS ONCE THE PRESERVE
OF AN ARISTOCRATIC ELITE.
ESTATES WERE PASSED
DOWN FROM FATHER TO SON
ALONG WITH TITLES AND
POLITICAL PRIVILEGES.
EVERYONE ELSE WAS A MERE TENANT
PAYING RENT TO THEIR LANDLORD.
EVEN THE RIGHT TO
VOTE IN ELECTIONS
WAS ORIGINALLY A FUNCTION
OF PROPERTY OWNERSHIP.
"IN ONE RESPECT, NOT MUCH
HAS CHANGED IN BRITAIN"
SINCE THOSE DAYS.
"OF 60 MILLION ACRES
OF BRITISH LAND,"
"AROUND 40 MILLION ARE OWNED
BY JUST 189,000 FAMILIES."
THE DIFFERENCE IS THAT
THEY NO LONGER MONOPOLIZE
THE POLITICAL SYSTEM.
"INDEED, THANKS TO REFORM
OF THE HOUSE OF LORDS,"
THE HEREDITARY PEERAGE IS BEING
PHASED OUT OF PARLIAMENT.
"NOW, YOU CAN
EXPLAIN THE DECLINE OF THE
ARISTOCRACY IN MANY WAYS,"
"BUT AS FAR AS IM CONCERNED,
THE MAIN DRIVER WAS FINANCE."
"UNTIL THE 1830s,
FORTUNE SMILED"
"ON THE BRITISH
LAND-OWNING ELITE,"
THE 30 OR SO FAMILIES
WITH GROSS ANNUAL
INCOME FROM THEIR LANDS
"ABOVE 60,000 A YEAR,"
ROUGHLY 150 MILLION TODAY.
WITH SUCH VAST PROPERTY
ASSETS BACKING THEM
"AND INCOME FROM AGRICULTURE
BOOMING, IT WAS HARD TO SEE"
HOW THE ARISTOCRACY
COULD FAIL TO FLOURISH.
"YET, BY IGNORING A FUNDAMENTAL
TRUTH ABOUT PROPERTY,"
THEY ENSURED THEIR OWN DECLINE.
[GUNSHOT]
[CROWS CAWING]
"LIKE MANY OF US TODAY,"
THE GREAT MAGNATES SAW THE
VALUE OF THEIR PROPERTY
AS A CASH COW
"AND USED IT TO
BORROW TO THE HILT,"
OFTEN MORE THAN THE
PROPERTY WAS WORTH.
WHAT THEYD FAILED TO UNDERSTAND
IS THAT PROPERTY
IS ONLY A SECURITY
TO THE PERSON WHO
LENDS YOU MONEY.
"AS A BORROWER, YOU STILL
HAVE TO EARN THE MONEY"
TO PAY BACK THE LOAN.
"AND FOR THE GREAT LANDOWNERS
OF VICTORIAN BRITAIN,"
THAT SUDDENLY BECAME A VERY
DIFFICULT THING TO DO.
NOWHERE WAS THE PAIN MORE ACUTE
THAN HERE IN THE HEART
OF RURAL BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
THERES SOMETHING
UNDENIABLY MAGNIFICENT
"ABOUT THIS HUGE
NEOCLASSICAL PALACE,"
"STOWE HOUSE, ARGUABLY THE
GREATEST PRIVATE RESIDENCE"
BUILT IN ENGLAND IN
THE 18th CENTURY.
JUST LOOK AT THESE
EXTRAORDINARY SCAGLIOLA PILLARS
OR THE STUNNING ELLIPTICAL
PLASTER CEILING.
"AND YET THERE SEEMS TO
BE SOMETHING MISSING,"
"OR RATHER, MANY THINGS,"
"BECAUSE ONCE, IN EACH
OF THESE ALCOVES,"
THERE WAS A ROMAN STATUE.
THE EXQUISITE
GEORGIAN FIREPLACES
HAVE BEEN RIPPED
OUT AND REPLACED
BY BOX STANDARD ONES LIKE THIS.
WHY?
HOW DID THIS MOST
STATELY OF STATELY HOMES
BECOME A MERE SHELL
OF ITS FORMER SELF?
THE ANSWER IS THAT
THIS HOUSE BELONGED
TO THE PRINCIPAL VICTIM
OF THE FIRST MODERN
PROPERTY CRASH--
"RICHARD PLANTAGENET
TEMPLE-NUGENT-BRYDGES-
CHANDOS-GRENVILLE,"
2nd DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM.
STOWE WAS ONLY PART
OF THE DUKES VAST
EMPIRE OF REAL ESTATE.
"IN ALL, HE OWNED
AROUND 67,000 ACRES"
"IN ENGLAND, IRELAND
AND JAMAICA."
THESE IMMENSE PROPERTIES
SEEMED MORE THAN ADEQUATE
"TO BACK HIS
EXTRAVAGANT LIFESTYLE,"
"AND HE SPENT MONEY AS IF IT
MIGHT GO OUT OF FASHION,"
"ON MISTRESSES, ON
ILLEGITIMATE CHILDREN,"
"WELL, ANYTHING THAT HE
THOUGHT WAS COMPATIBLE"
WITH HIS STANDING AS
A DUKE OF THE REALM.
[PEACOCK CALLS]
"BY 1845, THE JIG WAS UP."
GRAIN PRICES HAD BEGUN
THEIR LONG SLIDE DOWNWARDS
AND SO HAD THE INCOME
FROM AGRICULTURAL LAND.
RURAL PROPERTY PRICES PLUMMETED.
SUDDENLY THE ARISTOCRACY
FOUND THAT THEIR BORROWINGS
HAD OUTRUN THE VALUE
OF THEIR ESTATES.
"THE DUKE WAS SPENDING
FAR MORE THAN HIS INCOME,"
AND MOST OF THAT
WAS BEING ABSORBED
BY INTEREST PAYMENTS.
BUT THERE WAS TO
BE ONE FINAL BOUT
OF CONSPICUOUS CONSUMPTION.
IN PREPARATION FOR A VISIT
"BY QUEEN VICTORIA
AND PRINCE ALBERT,"
THE DUKE DECIDED TO SPLASH OUT
AND REFURBISH STOWE
HOUSE FROM TOP TO BOTTOM.
FIFTEEN SALOONS
WERE STUFFED FULL
OF THE MOST EXPENSIVE FURNITURE
THAT MONEY COULD BUY.
THE FLOORBOARDS WERE
GROANING UNDER THE WEIGHT
"OF GENOA VELVET,
EMBROIDERED SATIN"
AND GOLD BROCADE.
"WHEN THE QUEEN
SAW THE RESULTS,"
"SHE COMMENTED
RATHER WASPISHLY,"
I AM SURE I HAVE NO SUCH
SPLENDID APARTMENTS
IN EITHER OF MY PALACES.
"SADLY, THE COST OF
THIS MEGA-MAKEOVER"
PROVED TO BE THE FINAL STRAW
FOR THE DUCAL FINANCES.
"IN AUGUST 1848, TO
THE DUKES HORROR,"
HIS SON HAD THE ENTIRE CONTENTS
OF STOWE HOUSE AUCTIONED OFF.
NOW HIS ANCESTRAL STATELY
HOME WAS THROWN OPEN
FOR THRONGS OF BARGAIN HUNTERS
"TO BID FOR THE SILVER,
THE WINE, THE CHINA."
"TODAY, STOWE IS A
PRIVATE BOARDING SCHOOL."
ITS A POIGNANT SYMBOL
OF THE TRANSIENCE
OF LANDED WEALTH.
"IN THE MODERN WORLD,
IT TURNED OUT,"
A REGULAR JOB AND
A STEADY INCOME
"MATTERED MORE THAN
AN INHERITED TITLE,"
NO MATTER HOW MANY
ACRES YOU OWNED.
"DIVORCED
BY HIS LONG-SUFFERING AND
MUCH-BETRAYED SCOTTISH WIFE,"
WHOSE ENTIRE WARDROBE
HAD BEEN SEIZED
"BY SHERIFFS
OFFICERS IN LONDON,"
THE DUKE WAS FINALLY
FORCED TO RELINQUISH STOWE
AND MOVE INTO RENTED
ACCOMMODATION.
"HE EKED OUT HIS DAYS AT
HIS CLUB, THE CARLTON,"
WRITING A SUCCESSION OF
HIGHLY UNRELIABLE MEMOIRS
AND INCORRIGIBLY
CHASING ACTRESSES
AND OTHER MENS WIVES.
THE FALL OF THE
DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM
WAS A KIND OF HARBINGER
FOR A NEW DEMOCRATIC AGE
IN WHICH EVERY ADULT
WOULD BE GIVEN THE VOTE
WHETHER THEY OWNED
A STATELY HOME
OR PAID RENT FOR A HUMBLE FLAT.
"AS ARISTOCRATIC FORTUNES
FROM AGRICULTURE DECLINED,"
SO THE FRANCHISE WAS WIDENED.
"YET, THE RISE OF NEW MONEY IN
PLACE OF OLD LANDED WEALTH"
WAS ONLY ONE OF THE CHANGES
BROUGHT ABOUT BY FINANCE
IN THE 19th CENTURY.
ALMOST AS IMPORTANT WAS THE
DRAMATIC OVERSEAS EXPANSION
OF THE EUROPEAN EMPIRES.
IT USED TO BE SAID
THAT EMERGING MARKETS
WERE PLACES WHERE
THEY HAVE EMERGENCIES.
"INVESTING IN FARAWAY
PLACES CAN MAKE YOU RICH,"
"BUT WHEN THINGS GO WRONG,"
ITS OFTEN BEEN A FAST
TRACK TO FINANCIAL RUIN.
THATS WHY MANY OF TODAYS
APPARENTLY UNSTOPPABLE
EMERGING MARKETS
ARE REALLY RE-EMERGING MARKETS.
"THESE DAYS, OF COURSE,"
THE ULTIMATE RE-EMERGING
MARKET IS CHINA.
"TO TALK TO SOME PEOPLE,
THERES SIMPLY NO LIMIT"
TO THE AMOUNT OF
MONEY TO BE MADE HERE.
"AND ITS CERTAINLY TRUE THAT
OVER THE PAST 20 YEARS,"
THE MAINLAND HAS FOLLOWED
THE EXAMPLE SET HERE IN
HONG KONG AND BOOMED.
"AND YET, THIS ISNT
THE FIRST TIME"
THAT FOREIGN INVESTORS
HAVE PILED INTO CHINA
AIMING TO MAKE MEGABUCKS
"FROM THE WORLDS MOST
POPULOUS NATION,"
"AND THE LAST TIME,
THOSE FOREIGN INVESTORS"
LOST ALMOST AS MANY SHIRTS
AS THE LOCAL TAILORS HERE
CAN STITCH TOGETHER IN A WEEK.
"THE KEY PROBLEM WITH
OVERSEAS INVESTMENT,"
IS THAT ITS HARD FOR AN
INVESTOR IN LONDON OR NEW YORK
TO SEE WHAT A FOREIGN
GOVERNMENT OR COMPANY IS UP TO
WHEN THEYRE AN
OCEAN OR MORE APART.
"IF THE FOREIGNER BORROWER
DECIDES TO FAULT ON ITS DEBTS,"
WHATS AN INVESTOR TO DO?
THE ANSWER BEFORE 1914
WAS BRUTALLY SIMPLE
BUT EFFECTIVE.
GET YOUR GOVERNMENT
TO SEND IN THE NAVY.
"BY GUARANTEEING EUROPEAN
POLITICAL CONTROL,"
GUNBOAT DIPLOMACY
PROVIDED REASSURANCE
FOR BRITISH INVESTORS EVEN
AT THE REMOTEST EXTREMITIES
OF THE WORLD ECONOMY.
THE ROYAL NAVY
PROVIDED THE FIREPOWER
THAT UNDERWROTE THE FIRST
AGE OF GLOBALIZATION
"AND ITS PIONEERS,
LIKE WILLIAM JARDINE"
AND JAMES MATHESON.
JARDINE AND MATHESON
WERE BUCCANEERING SCOTS
WHOD SET UP A TRADING COMPANY
IN THE SOUTHERN CHINESE
PORT OF CANTON IN 1832.
"NOT TO PUT TOO
FINE A POINT ON IT,"
THEIR MOST PROFITABLE LINE OF
BUSINESS WAS DRUG DEALING.
PRODUCED UNDER BRITISH
GOVERNMENT CONTROL IN INDIA
"TO CHINAS POPULATION
OF ADDICTS,"
A TRADE THAT CHINAS
EMPEROR HAD BANNED.
"ON MARCH THE 10th, 1839,"
AN IMPERIAL OFFICIAL
NAMED LIN ZEXU
ARRIVED IN CANTON UNDER
ORDERS FROM THE EMPEROR
TO STAMP OUT THE TRADE.
"HE BESIEGED THE BRITISH
OPIUM WAREHOUSES,"
BLOCKING ANY FURTHER IMPORTS.
"20,000 CHESTS OF OPIUM
VALUED AT 2 MILLION"
WERE CONFISCATED
AND LITERALLY THROWN IN THE SEA.
"FACED WITH
CATASTROPHIC LOSSES,"
JARDINE HURRIED TO LONDON
TO LOBBY THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT
TO SEND A GUNBOAT.
"WELL, JARDINE GOT
HIS WISH GRANTED."
"ON AUGUST THE 23rd, 1840,"
BRITISH GUNSHIPS LANDED
HERE ON HONG KONG ISLAND.
THE QING EMPIRE WAS ABOUT
TO FEEL THE FULL FORCE
OF HISTORYS MOST
SUCCESSFUL NARCO STATE.
"AS JARDINE HAD PREDICTED,"
THE ROYAL NAVY MADE SHORT
WORK OF THE CHINESE DEFENSES.
"WITH SOUTHWESTERN CHINA
UNDER BRITISH CONTROL,"
THE OPIUM TRADE WAS
GIVEN FREE REIGN.
DRUG ADDICTION EXPLODED.
LARGE TRACTS OF THE COUNTRY SLID
INTO REBELLION AND ANARCHY.
"BUT FOR JARDINE, MATHESON,"
"WITH THEIR HEAD OFFICE NOW
ESTABLISHED IN HONG KONG,"
THE GLORY DAYS OF
VICTORIAN GLOBALIZATION
HAD ARRIVED.
"BY 1900, THE FIRM
HAD DIVERSIFIED"
INTO MORE RESPECTABLE
LINES OF BUSINESS.
"IT HAD ITS OWN BREWERIES,
ITS OWN COTTON MILLS,"
ITS OWN INSURANCE COMPANY
"AND ITS OWN RAILWAYS,"
LIKE THE ONE THEY BUILT
FROM KOWLOON TO CANTON.
"BACK IN 1913, AN
INVESTOR IN LONDON"
"HAD AN EXTRAORDINARY RANGE
OF FOREIGN OPPORTUNITIES,"
AND NOTHING
ILLUSTRATES THAT BETTER
THAN THE LEDGERS OF N.M.
ROTHSCHILD AND SONS.
JUST A SINGLE PAGE FROM 1913
"LISTS NO FEWER THAN 20
DIFFERENT FOREIGN SECURITIES,"
"INCLUDING BONDS ISSUED
BY CHILE, EGYPT,"
"GERMANY, HUNGARY, ITALY,"
"NOT FORGETTING 11 DIFFERENT
RAILWAY COMPANIES,"
"INCLUDING 4 FROM ARGENTINA, 2
FROM CANADA, AND DOWN HERE,"
THE GOOD OLD KOWLOON
TO CANTON RAILWAY LINE.
"FOR THE FIRST TIME IN HISTORY,"
THE WORLD ECONOMY
WAS TRULY UNITED
BY A COMBINATION OF LOW TRADE
AND HIGH FINANCE.
"YET, THIS FIRST ERA OF
FINANCIAL GLOBALIZATION"
WAS TO BE BROUGHT
TO A VIOLENT HALT
BY THE WORLDS FIRST
TRULY GLOBAL CONFLICT.
"ON JUNE THE 28th, 1914,"
"THE HEIR TO THE AUSTRIAN
THRONE, THE ARCHDUKE
FRANZ FERDINAND,"
"WAS ASSASSINATED IN THE
BOSNIAN CAPITAL, SARAJEVO."
"INITIALLY, FINANCIAL MARKETS
SHRUGGED OFF THE NEWS"
AS JUST ANOTHER BOUT
OF BALKAN BLOODSHED.
"IN REALITY, THE
ASSASSINATION HAD SPARKED
OFF A CHAIN REACTION"
IN THE WORLDS FINANCIAL MARKETS.
AS INVESTORS BELATEDLY
GRASPED THE LIKELIHOOD
"OF A FULL-SCALE EUROPEAN WAR,"
LIQUIDITY--THE ABILITY TO
BORROW MONEY OR SELL ASSETS--
WAS SUCKED OUT OF
THE WORLD ECONOMY
AS IF THE BOTTOM HAD
DROPPED OUT OF A BATH.
THE RESULTING DISRUPTION
TO INTERNATIONAL FINANCE
SHATTERED GLOBALIZATION.
ITS ABSOLUTELY FASCINATING
TO FOLLOW THE OUTBREAK
OF THE FIRST WORLD WAR
THROUGH THE FINANCIAL
PAGES OF THE LONDON TIMES.
"IT WASNT UNTIL JULY
THE 22nd, 1914,"
THAT ANYBODY APPRECIATED
THAT THE ASSASSINATION
OF THE ARCHDUKE FRANZ FERDINAND
IN SARAJEVO 3 WEEKS BEFORE
MIGHT HAVE SOME
FINANCIAL REPERCUSSIONS.
"JUST 10 DAYS LATER, ON
AUGUST THE 1st, 1914,"
THE TIMES HAD TO REPORT
"THE CLOSURE OF THE
STOCK EXCHANGE,"
"AND CLOSED IT REMAINED UNTIL
JANUARY THE 4th, 1915."
WHY WERE INVESTORS SO
SEEMINGLY OBLIVIOUS
TO ARMAGEDDON JUST DAYS BEFORE
THE OUTBREAK OF WORLD WAR?
"WELL, THE ANSWER IS
THAT A COMBINATION"
OF FINANCIAL INNOVATION
AND GLOBAL INTEGRATION
HAD MADE THE WORLD SEEM
REASSURINGLY SAFE.
"THE LIGHTS IN FINANCIAL MARKETS
WERE FLASHING GREEN, NOT RED,"
UNTIL THE VERY EVE
OF DESTRUCTION.
"THERE MAY BE A LESSON
HERE FOR OUR TIME, TOO."
FINANCIAL GLOBALIZATION MARK I
"TOOK A GENERATION TO ENGINEER,"
"BUT IT WAS BLOWN APART
IN A MATTER OF DAYS,"
AND IT WOULD TAKE
MORE THAN A GENERATION
TO REPAIR THE DAMAGE DONE
BY THE GUNS OF AUGUST 1914.
SO IS NOTHING WE CAN
DO TO PROTECT OURSELVES
FROM THE THREAT OF
FINANCIAL DISASTER?
"NEXT TIME ON THE
ASCENT OF MONEY,"
WELL SEE THAT FINANCE
IS AS MUCH ABOUT RISK
AS IT IS ABOUT RETURN.
"THE BIG QUESTION
IS, ARE YOU INSURED,"
OR ARE YOU HEDGED?
"NEXT TIME ON THE
ASCENT OF MONEY,"
SAVING UP FOR THE
PROVERBIAL RAINY DAY
IS THE FIRST PRINCIPLE
OF INSURANCE.
HOW SHOULD WE DEAL WITH THE
RISKS AND UNCERTAINTIES
OF THE FUTURE?
THIS WALL OF WATER
HAD TO BE MAYBE 15
TO 20 FEET TALL.
AND MOVING FAST.
"MOVING QUICKLY, JUST
COMING DOWN THIS BOULEVARD"
AND JUST TAKING EVERYTHING
WITH IT AS IT WOULD COME.
THE WORLD CAN BE
A DANGEROUS PLACE.
ARE YOU INSURED?
THE ASCENT OF MONEY--
A FINANCIAL HISTORY
OF THE WORLD.
TO FIND OUT MORE ABOUT
THE ASCENT OF MONEY
"AND WATCH THE FILM, VISIT..."
CAPTIONING MADE POSSIBLE
BY FRIENDS OF NCI
FUNDING FOR THE ASCENT OF MONEY
WAS PROVIDED BY...
"MY IDEA CREATED JOBS
FOR 2,000 PEOPLE."
MY IDEA WILL BRING RENEWABLE
ENERGY TO EVERYONE.
AN ENTREPRENEUR WITH AN
IDEA CAN CHANGE THE WORLD.
I HAVE AN IDEA.